# Quantitative Trading Strategies

In this article I'm going to introduce you to some of the basic concepts which accompany an end-to-end quantitative trading system. This post will hopefully serve two audiences. The first will be individuals trying to obtain a job at a fund as a quantitative trader. The second will be individuals who wish to try and set up their own "retail" algorithmic trading business.

Quantitative trading is an extremely sophisticated area of quant finance. It can take a significant amount of time to gain the necessary knowledge to pass an interview or construct your own trading strategies. Not only that but it requires extensive programming expertise, at the very least in a language such as MATLAB, R or Python. However as the trading frequency of the strategy increases, the technological aspects become much more relevant. Thus being familiar with C/C++ will be of paramount importance.

A quantitative trading system consists of four major components:

**Strategy Identification** - Finding a strategy, exploiting an edge and deciding on trading frequency
**Strategy Backtesting** - Obtaining data, analysing strategy performance and removing biases
**Execution System** - Linking to a brokerage, automating the trading and minimising transaction costs
**Risk Management** - Optimal capital allocation, "bet size"/Kelly criterion and trading psychology
We'll begin by taking a look at how to identify a trading strategy.

## Strategy Identification
All quantitative trading processes begin with an initial period of research. This research process encompasses finding a strategy, seeing whether the strategy fits into a portfolio of other strategies you may be running, obtaining any data necessary to test the strategy and trying to optimise the strategy for higher returns and/or lower risk. You will need to factor in your own capital requirements if running the strategy as a "retail" trader and how any transaction costs will affect the strategy.

Contrary to popular belief it is actually quite straightforward to find profitable strategies through various public sources. Academics regularly publish theoretical trading results (albeit mostly gross of transaction costs). Quantitative finance blogs will discuss strategies in detail. Trade journals will outline some of the strategies employed by funds.

Here is a small list of places to begin looking for strategy ideas:

[Social Science Research Network](www.ssrn.com)
[arXiv Quantitative Finance](arxiv.org/archive/q-fin)
[Seeking Alpha](www.seekingalpha.com)
[Elite Trader](www.elitetrader.com)
[Nuclear Phynance](www.nuclearphynance.com)
[Quantivity](quantivity.wordpress.com)

Once a strategy, or set of strategies, has been identified it now needs to be tested for profitability on historical data. That is the domain of backtesting.

## Strategy Backtesting

Once a strategy has been identified, it is necessary to obtain the historical data through which to carry out testing and, perhaps, refinement. There are a significant number of data vendors across all asset classes. Their costs generally scale with the quality, depth and timeliness of the data. The traditional starting point for beginning quant traders (at least at the retail level) is to use the free data set from Yahoo Finance. I won't dwell on providers too much here, rather I would like to concentrate on the general issues when dealing with historical data sets.

When backtesting a system one must be able to quantify how well it is performing. The "industry standard" metrics for quantitative strategies are the maximum drawdown and the Sharpe Ratio. The maximum drawdown characterises the largest peak-to-trough drop in the account equity curve over a particular time period (usually annual). This is most often quoted as a percentage. LFT strategies will tend to have larger drawdowns than HFT strategies, due to a number of statistical factors. A historical backtest will show the past maximum drawdown, which is a good guide for the future drawdown performance of the strategy. The second measurement is the Sharpe Ratio, which is heuristically defined as the average of the excess returns divided by the standard deviation of those excess returns. Here, excess returns refers to the return of the strategy above a pre-determined benchmark, such as the S&P500 or a 3-month Treasury Bill. Note that annualised return is not a measure usually utilised, as it does not take into account the volatility of the strategy (unlike the Sharpe Ratio).

## Execution Systems
An execution system is the means by which the list of trades generated by the strategy are sent and executed by the broker. Despite the fact that the trade generation can be semi- or even fully-automated, the execution mechanism can be manual, semi-manual (i.e. "one click") or fully automated. For LFT strategies, manual and semi-manual techniques are common. For HFT strategies it is necessary to create a fully automated execution mechanism, which will often be tightly coupled with the trade generator (due to the interdependence of strategy and technology).

The key considerations when creating an execution system are the interface to the brokerage, minimisation of transaction costs (including commission, slippage and the spread) and divergence of performance of the live system from backtested performance.


## Risk Management

Risk management encompasses what is known as optimal capital allocation, which is a branch of portfolio theory. This is the means by which capital is allocated to a set of different strategies and to the trades within those strategies. It is a complex area and relies on some non-trivial mathematics. The industry standard by which optimal capital allocation and leverage of the strategies are related is called the Kelly criterion. Since this is an introductory article, I won't dwell on its calculation. The Kelly criterion makes some assumptions about the statistical nature of returns, which do not often hold true in financial markets, so traders are often conservative when it comes to the implementation.

Another key component of risk management is in dealing with one's own psychological profile. There are many cognitive biases that can creep in to trading. Although this is admittedly less problematic with algorithmic trading if the strategy is left alone! A common bias is that of loss aversion where a losing position will not be closed out due to the pain of having to realise a loss. Similarly, profits can be taken too early because the fear of losing an already gained profit can be too great. Another common bias is known as recency bias. This manifests itself when traders put too much emphasis on recent events and not on the longer term. Then of course there are the classic pair of emotional biases - fear and greed. These can often lead to under- or over-leveraging, which can cause blow-up (i.e. the account equity heading to zero or worse!) or reduced profits.
